---
tags:
title: Groth16
---

####  Less simple attempt:
A simple, albeit not uniformly-distributed, solution would be:
\begin{align}
A&\gets \alpha\\\\\
B&\gets \beta\\\\\
C&\gets \frac{-\left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma}}{\crs{\delta}}
\end{align}
To make it uniformly-distributed, we can "randomize" it a little:
\begin{align}
r_\alpha,r_\beta\randget\F^2\\\\\
A&\gets \alpha + r_\alpha\\\\\
B&\gets \beta + r_\beta\\\\\
C&\gets \frac{-\left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma}}{\crs{\delta}} + \frac{r_\alpha\beta +r_\alpha r_\beta + r_\beta\alpha}{\crs{\delta}}
\end{align}

#### Fail: Do not have $\one{B}$...

Suppose we have a proof $\pi\bydef(\one{A},\two{B},\one{C})$ that verifies.
Then, we can **re-randomize** this proof as a new one $\pi' = (\one{A},\two{B},\one{C})$ as follows:
\begin{align}
(\Delta{s},\Delta{r}) &\randget \F^2\\\\\
\one{A'} &\gets \one{A} + \Delta{r}\deltaOne\\\\\ 
\two{B'} &\gets \two{B} + \Delta{s}\deltaTwo\\\\\ 
\one{C'} &\gets \one{C} + \Delta{s}\one{A} + \Delta{r}\one{B} + \Delta{s}\Delta{r}\deltaOne
\end{align}

{: .todo}
Missing $\one{B}$...

{: .note}
The re-randomization algorithm follows naturally from the way that $A,B,C$ are randomized in $\grothProve$ using uniform scalars $r,s\in\F$ (see Eqs. $\ref{eq:groth16-a}$, $\ref{eq:groth16-b}$ and $\ref{eq:groth16-c}$).

To see why correctness holds, recall that Eq. \ref{eq:groth16-field-verify} holds iff. a proof $\pi$ is valid.
\begin{align}
\crs{\alpha}\crs{\beta} - AB + \left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma} + C\crs{\delta} &\equals 0
\end{align}
Next, observe that it also holds for $\pi'$: 
\begin{align}
\crs{\alpha}\crs{\beta} - A'B' + \left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma} + C'\crs{\delta} &\equals 0
\Leftrightarrow\\\\\
\crs{\alpha}\crs{\beta} - (\Delta{r}\crs{\delta} + A)(\Delta{s}\crs{\delta} + B) + \left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma} + \left(C + \Delta{s} A + \Delta{r}B + \Delta{s}\Delta{r}\crs{\delta}\right) \crs{\delta} &\equals 0
\Leftrightarrow\\\\\
\crs{\alpha}\crs{\beta} - (\Delta{s}A\crs{\delta} + \Delta{r}B\crs{\delta} + \Delta{s}\Delta{r}\crs{\delta^2} + AB) + \left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma} + \left(C + \Delta{s} A + \Delta{r}B + \Delta{s}\Delta{r}\crs{\delta}\right) \crs{\delta} &\equals 0
\Leftrightarrow\\\\\
\crs{\alpha}\crs{\beta} - AB + \left(\sum_{j=0}^\ell a_j \Uj\right)\crs{\gamma} + C \crs{\delta} &= 0
\end{align}

### Manual derivation of h(X)

Then, differentiate this expression:
\begin{align}
h'(X)
 &= \left(\frac{\greendashedbox{\gu(X) \rv(X) - \bw(X)}}{X^n - 1}\right)' = \\\\\
 &= \frac{\left(\greendashedbox{\gu(X) \rv(X) - \bw(X)}\right)'(X^n - 1) + (X^n-1)'(\greendashedbox{\gu(X)\rv(X)-\bw(X)})}{\left(X^n - 1\right)^2} = \\\\\
 &= \frac{\left(\greendashedbox{\gu(X) \rv(X) - \bw(X)}\right)'(X^n - 1) + nX^{n-1}(\greendashedbox{\gu(X)\rv(X)-\bw(X)})}{(X^{n - 1})(X^n - 1)} = \\\\\
\end{align}
Now, replace the undifferentiated $\greendashedbox{\gu(X)\rv(X)-\bw(X)}$ by $h(X)(X^n - 1)$, as per Eq. $\ref{eq:uv-w}$:
\begin{align}
h'(X)
 &= \frac{\left(\greendashedbox{\gu(X) \rv(X) - \bw(X)}\right)'(X^n - 1) + nX^{n-1}\left\[h(X)(X^n-1)\right\]}{(X^n - 1)(X^n-1)} = \\\\\
 &= \frac{\left(\greendashedbox{\gu(X) \rv(X) - \bw(X)}\right)' + nX^{n-1}h(X)}{X^n-1} = \\\\\
 &= \frac{\left\[\gu(X) \rv(X)\right\]' - \bw'(X) + nX^{n-1}h(X)}{X^n-1} = \\\\\
 &= \frac{\gu'(X) \rv(X) + \gu(X)\rv'(X) - \bw'(X) + nX^{n-1}h(X)}{X^n-1}
\end{align}
Reorganize the above formula to get an expression for $h(X)$:
\begin{align}
h(X) &= \frac{h'(X)(X^n-1)-\left(\gu'(X)\rv(X)+\gu(X)\rv'(X)−\bw'(X)\right)}{nX^{n-1}}
\end{align}
Next, plug in $X = \omega^i$ and recall that $X^n - 1$ has a root at $\omega^i$ because $\omega^n = 1$.
This gives:
\begin{align}
h(\omega^i) 
 &= \frac{h'(\omega^i)((\omega^i)^n - 1) + u'(\omega^i)\rv(\omega^i)+\gu(\omega^i)v'(\omega^i)−w'(\omega^i)}{n\omega^{i(n-1)}}\\\\\
 &= \frac{h'(\omega^i)\cdot 0 + u'(\omega^i)\rv(\omega^i)+\gu(\omega^i)v'(\omega^i)−w'(\omega^i)}{n\omega^{i(n-1)}}\\\\\
\label{eq:hx-diff-formula}
 &= \frac{u'(\omega^i)\rv(\omega^i)+\gu(\omega^i)v'(\omega^i)−w'(\omega^i)}{n\omega^{i(n-1)}}
\end{align}

-->

## MPC notes

{: .warning}
**Notation:** Our notation in Eq. \ref{eq:parsed-ptau} is **not** meanted to suggest that the parsed group elements are actually of the right form (e.g., that $\left(\two{\tau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]}$ actually contain the correct powers of $\tau$).
Instead we use this notation purely for ease of readability.
It would have been more formal to assign variable names here: e.g.,  
$\tilde{b}, \left(\tilde{t}_i,\mathsf{at}_i,\mathsf{bt}_i\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]}, \left(t_i\right)\_{i\in[0, 2n-2]}$

----

At a high level, the protocol allows a bunch of players to **contribute**, in a **sequential** manner, to the generation of the proving and verification keys.
Specifially, every **round**, a single player joins and:
 1. verifies the previous player's contribution,
 1. generates and submits its own **contribution**,
 1. leaves, which triggers the end of the round.

There can be as many rounds as needed: ideally, until "enough" contributions have been gathered.
(Recall that as long as one player is honest, the trapdoor will remain unknown, which is enough for knowledge-soundness of Groth16.)
 
----

 1. **Phase 1** starts with just the group generators $G_1$ and $G_2$ as its input.
 2. After enough players contribute to phase-1, it produces a **phase-1 final output**.
 3. **Phase 2** starts with this _phase-1 final output_ as its input.
 4. After enough players contribute to phase-2, it produces a **phase-2 final output**.
     + Note that the phase-1 and phase-2 players need not have any overlap.
 5. Lastly, this phase-2 final output is **post-processed**.
 6. This yields a Groth16 proving key and verification key, as would be outputted by [$\bgmSetup$](#mathsfbgm17setup1lambda-rrightarrow-mathsfprkmathsfvkmathsftd), except no one knows the trapdoor.

----

As mentioned before, the phase-1 sub-protocol operates in a round-robin fashion:

 1. When a phase-1 round starts, it has an **input** $\ptau(\tau,\alpha,\beta)$ 
     - The 1st round's input is $\ptau(1,1,1) = [G_1, G_2]$ (i.e., substitute $\tau=\alpha=\beta=1$ in Eq. \ref{eq:ptau} above)
 1. The round's contributing player $P$ will "add" his **secret contribution** $(\otau,\oalpha,\obeta)\randget \F^3$.
 1. When the round ends, it produces an **output** $\ptau(\otau\cdot\tau,\oalpha\cdot\alpha,\obeta\cdot\beta)\bydef\ptau(\btau,\balpha,\bbeta)$
     - Note that this round output is as per Eq \ref{eq:ptau}.
 1. This repeats, with the next round's input being the output of the previous round, until "enough" players have contributed.

{: .note}
"Enough" players means as many players as needed to ensure at least one of them discards their secret contribution, thereby discarding the trapdoor.
Obviously, different applications will require different levels of paranoia.
In the past, MPC ceremonies have used anywhere from six players to hundreds of players.

Note that it is easy for the player to "add" his secret contribution: the player just "multiplies in" powers of their random trapdoor.
For example, the player can compute their secret $(\otau^0,\otau^1,\ldots,\otau^{n-1})$ and then "multiply in":
\begin{align}
\left(\otau^i\cdot \two{\tau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]} 
 = \left(\two{(\otau\tau)^0}, \two{(\otau\tau)^1}, \two{(\otau\tau)^2}, \ldots, \two{(\otau\tau)^{n-1}}\right)
 \bydef \left(\two{\btau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]} 
\end{align}
Similarly, the player could compute all $(\oalpha\otau^0,\oalpha\otau^1,\ldots,\oalpha\otau^{n-1})$ and then "multiply in":
\begin{align}
\label{eq:mpc-phase1-update-alphatau}
\left(\oalpha\otau^i\cdot \one{\alpha\tau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]} 
 = \left(\one{\oalpha\alpha(\otau\tau)^0}, \one{\oalpha\alpha(\otau\tau)^1}, \ldots, \one{\oalpha\alpha(\otau\tau)^{n-1}}\right)
 \bydef \left(\one{\balpha\btau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]} 
\end{align}
The more **difficult part** is that the contributing player must prove it has done these computations correctly!
For example, the player must prove that $\left(\one{\balpha\btau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]}$ was correctly computed (as per Eq. $\ref{eq:mpc-phase1-update-alphatau}$) from $\left(\one{\alpha\tau^i}\right)\_{i\in[0, n-1]}$ and secret $(\oalpha,\otau)$ that the player **knows**.
This requires a special-purpose ZKPoK, which is described in [BGM17][^BGM17].

<!-- TODOs

# Why does Groth16 work?

We focus on the [BGM17] formulation of Groth16 because its MPC is simpler and its VK is smaller.
As a result, most tools use the [BGM17]-formulation of Groth16 (again, see [snarkjs](https://github.com/iden3/snarkjs)).

Let's attempt to instantiate a naive Groth16-like protocol for proving satisfiability of $\relqap$.

Assume the $\zkpSetup$ algorithm returned KZG commitments to the QAP polynomials:

$$\one{\gu_j(\tau)},\one{\rv_j(\tau)},\one{\bw_j(\tau)},\forall j\in[0,m]$$

(Recall that $m$ is the QAP size.)

{: .todo}
Build strawman's, showcase their problems & eventually converge onto Groth16.

## Knowledge-soundness for [BGM17]

{: .todo}
Do full proof, following Mary's proof of BGM17[^Mall18Groth]

{: .todo}
I guess the reason you cannot just set $h(X) = 0$ and then add a remainder is because there aren't any $\tau^i/\delta$ terms...
In fact, every **round** of the phase-1 MPC outputs **powers-of-$\tau$**, with each player taking the previous powers-of-$\tau$ and incorporating his own secret contribution into them.

-->

{% include refs.md %}
