---
tags:
title: Circom
#date: 2020-11-05 20:45:59
#published: false
permalink: circom
#sidebar:
#    nav: cryptomat
#article_header:
#  type: cover
#  image:
#    src: /pictures/.jpg
---

{: .info}
**tl;dr:** Everything I wanted to know but was afraid to ask about `circom`.

<!--more-->

<!-- Here you can define LaTeX macros -->
<div style="display: none;">$
$</div> <!-- $ -->

## Notes

As put by Palladino[^Pall23]:
> The main challenges [in] Circom is understanding when you are writing constraint-generation code, and when you are writing witness-generation code, and tracking what values are known at compile-time versus only known at runtime.
> [...]
> Keeping in mind the difference between constraint and witness generation times can guard you against underconstrained computation bugs.

### Terminology

 - **witness generation**: computation of _hints_ a.k.a. "witness data" that aids in satisfying the constraints encoded in a circom template
    - can be sped up with [parallel](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/templates-and-components/#components) keyword
 - **variables**
    - [circom docs say](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/variables-and-mutability/): _"variables are identifiers that hold non-signal data and are mutable."_
    - but, a more accurate mental model, AFAICT, is that they are compile-time symbolic expressions (e.g., often they are used to symbolically-store a linear combination of signals at compile time; see the [Num2Bits example](#num2bits-template))
 - **functions**: reusable pieces of code used only during _witness generation_
 - **signals**
    - input signals; i.e.,:
        + part of the NP relation's statement or witness
        + you cannot do `s <== expression` for `signal input s`; only for `signal s`.
    - output signals
    - intermediate signals (computed via witness generation)
 - **template**: a family of circuits, parameterized by one or more values known at compile-time (think C++ templates)
    + template parameters
 - components
    - [anonymous components](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/anonymous-components-and-tuples/)
 - **assignment**
 - **constraints**

### Operators

 - `a \ b` computes the $\lfloor a / b\rfloor$ division quotient as if dividing natural numbers (i.e., s.t. $a=b q + r$ and $0 \le r < b$, when viewed as natural numbers)


### Signals

#### Input signals versus output signals.

I understand that marking a `signal` in a template as `input` or `output` helps define a "function-like" interface for the template, with some nicer calling syntax that avoids explicitly instantiating a template via the `component` keyword.

An example:
```
pragma circom 2.0.0;

template Multiplier2(){
   signal input in1;
   signal input in2;
   signal output out <== in1 * in2;
}

component main {public [in1, in2]} = Multiplier2();
```

As emphasized in the circom docs: **"all output signals of the main component are public (and cannot be made private)"**.

In contrast, _"the input signals of the main component are private if not stated otherwise using the keyword public as above"_

### Variables: `var` versus `signal`

As far as I can tell, `var` is a poor-name for a _"compile-time derivable linear combination of signals"_ (including the trivial one like `var = some_signal;` or `var = SomeTemplateCall(N)(in);`).

That's typically what you put in a `var`, AFAICT.

You can also put (compile-time) constants or any other compile-time expression.

An example of how a `var` is a compile-time linear combination of signals is in [Num2Bits](#num2bits-template).

### Witness generation versus constraints

{: .todo}
Find a more natural circuit that showcases this difference. Not `IsZero()`.

As explained by Palladino[^Pall23]:

 > When writing a circuit you're writing two different programs, that belong to two different programming paradigms, in a single one.

The most important thing to know: [when (not) to use `<--`](https://github.com/pluto/circom-correctly-constrained?tab=readme-ov-file#when-may-a-developer-choose-to-use----assignment-over-).

### Tags

Very useful for safety.
See nice article by Hess[^Hess24].

e.g., the result of the [IsZero](#iszero-template) template could be tagged as `binary` to indicate
that the returned output is either 0 or 1:

```
template IsZero() {
  signal input in;
  signal output {binary} out;
  signal inv;

  inv <-- in != 0 ? 1/in : 0;
  out <== -in * inv +1;

  in * out === 0;
}
```

{: .todo}
I found Circom's [docs](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/tags/) confusing because they make it seem like `binary` is a language-reserved tag with this actual meaning? 
(e.g., _"This tag means that each signal in the array is always expected to be 0 or 1, in order to compute the corresponding number correctly."_)

The code below would propagate the `binary` tag to the `a` signal:
```
component isz = IsZero();
isz.in <== 10;
signal a <=== isz.out
```

Tags can have compile-time values:

 > "Valued tags behave like parameters which means that they can only be assigned to values known at compilation time."

e.g., a template's compile time parameter can be used to tag its output signal's max bit length:

```
template Bits2Num(n) {
    signal input {binary} in[n];
    signal output {maxbit} out;
    var num = 0;

    var pow_2 = 1;
    for (var i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        num += in[i] * pow_2;
        pow_2 = pow2 + pow_2;
    }
    out.maxbit = n;

    num ==> out;
}
```

This suggests max lengths of strings could be tags.

### Buses

Very useful for readable, maintainable code.
And therefore, for safety.
See [here](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/buses/#definition).

Buses, combined with [tags](#tags) can start emulating a safe type system in `circom`.

For example, an elliptic curve point can be represented as:

```
bus Point() {
    signal x;
    signal y;
}
```

You can even tag buses: e.g., an Edwards `Point()` vs. a Montgomery one!
So, you can have templates that work like this:

```
template Edwards2Montgomery () {
  input  Point() { edwards_point    } in;
  output Point() { montgomery_point } out;

  out.x <–- (1 + in.y) / (1 - in.y);
  out.y <–- out.x / in.x;

  out.x * (1 - in.y) === (1 + in.y);
  out.y * in.x === out.x;
}
```

Or, you can even tag signals in buses:

``` 
bus Book () {
  signal {maxvalue} title[50];
  signal {maxvalue} author[50];
  signal {maxvalue} sold_copies;
  signal {maxvalue} year;
};
```

Buses can be nested (but not recursed):

```
bus Date() {
    signal day;
    signal month;
    signal year;
}

bus Person() {
    signal name[50];
    Date() birthday;
}
```

Buses can be parameterized by compile-time constants:

```
bus Vector(N) {
    signal v[N];
}

bus Matrix(NUM_ROWS, NUM_COLS) {
	Vector(NUM_ROWS) column[NUM_COLS];
}
```

### Assert

The `assert` keyword is particularly "interesting."
I think I'm gonna stay away from it.

Quoting from [here](https://github.com/pluto/circom-correctly-constrained?tab=readme-ov-file#the-basics), it is supposed to add constraints:
```
// if all values are known at compile-time the assertion is checked then
// otherwise, the assertion creates a constraint.
assert(a <= b);
assert(a * a == b);
```

But I don't think that's true, from looking at the circom docs and from [here](https://www.rareskills.io/post/circom-tutorial#:~:text=constraint%20to%20pass.-,Circom%20assert,-Confusingly%20enough%2C%20Circom) or [here](https://www.chainsecurity.com/blog/circom-assertions-misconceptions-and-deceptions): it does **not** add constraints.


## Non-trivial examples

### `IsZero()` template

This is a template that outputs 1 when the input signal is 0 and outputs 0 otherwise.

It should be the most trivial thing to implement, no?
Yet it turns out that, while checking whether something is zero is trivial (i.e., `something === 0`), assigning a signal with the truth value of `something === 0` is not as trivial...
(This is because the only operations in `circom` are equality checks, addition and multiplication.)

{: .note}
This example will also illustrate the difference between _witness generation_ versus _constraining_.

{% highlight circom linenos %}
template IsZero() {
  signal input in;
  signal output out;
  signal inv;

  inv <-- in != 0 ? 1/in : 0;

  out <== -in * inv + 1;
  in * out === 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

How does it work? Here's a simple analysis:

 - When `in` is 0, then:
    - `out <== -in * inv + 1` (line 8) implies `out <== 0 * inv + 1`.
	+ Which implies `out <== 1`, ensuring the desired behaviour.
	- **Q**: But then `inv` does not even matter for this case? Which is why it is assigned 0? But why 0? It could be assigned anything it seems.
 - When `in` is **not** 0, then:
    - `in * out === 0` (line 9) implies `out === 0`. 
	+ As a result, `out <== -in * inv + 1` implies `0 <== -in * inv + 1`
	+ Which implies `in * inv === 1`
	- Which can be satisfied, since the witness generation can compute an inverse via the  `inv <-- in != 0 ? 1/in : 0` line.

{: .error}
**Observation:** I find the explanation in [`circom`'s docs](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/basic-operators/#examples-using-operators-from-the-circom-library) a bit confusing, perhaps even in a dangerous way.
It says: _"If `in` is 0, then [...]. Otherwise, `in * inv` is always 1, then `out` is 0."_
This could be interpreted to suggest that `circom` enforces that `inv` be correctly computed as the inverse of `in`. Which is not the case. 
It's not that circom guarantees `in * inv` will be always 1; it's that when `in` is _not_ zero, the only way to satisfy line 8 and 9's constraints is to correctly compute the inverse `inv` via the witness generation on line 6.

{: .note}
In a way, this rather-elegant `IsZero()` template perfectly illustrates how non-intuitive `circom` can be when it comes to efficiently-programming ZK relations.

### `Num2Bits()` template

Let's also consider the `Num2Bits()` [example from circom's docs](https://docs.circom.io/circom-language/basic-operators/#examples-using-operators-from-the-circom-library), which returns the binary representation of its input, as `n` bits (although edited with more sane variable names and annotated with comments).

This example illustrates:
 - template parameters (e.g., `n`)
 - _variables_ versus _signals_
 - _witness generation_ versus _constraining_

{% highlight circom linenos %}
/**
 * Outputs a truth bit for whether in[0] < in[1] when viewed as N-bit 
 * integers.
 *
 * Parameters:
 *   N      in[0] and in[1] MUST be in [0, 2^N)
 *
 * Input signals:
 *   in     array of the two numbers to be compared
 *
 * Output signals:
 *   out    a bit indicating whether in[0] < in[1] when viewed as integers 
 */
template LessThan(N) {
    // This seems to (unfortunately) be hard-coded for the scalar field of BN254,
    // where scalars are \le (p - 1) and where 2^253 < p < 2^254.
    //
    // The choice of N <= 252 ensures that the maximum value assigned to `bits` 
    // below is 2^N + (2^N - 1) = 2^{N+1} - 1 = 2^253 - 1, and thus does not
    // exceed p-1.
    //
    // (If N were <= 253, then this maximum value would have been 2^254 - 1
    //  which would be larger than p-1 and would thus not fit in a signal.)
    assert(N <= 252);

    signal input in[2];
    signal output out;  // TODO(Tag): add {binary} tag?

    // (N+1)-bit representation of m = (2^N + in[0]) - in[1]
    // e.g., for N = 3
    //  in[0] = 100
    //  in[1] = 001
    //  m     = (1000 + 100) - 001
    //        = 1100 - 001
    //        = 1011
    signal bits <== Num2Bits(N + 1)(in[0] + (1 << N) - in[1]);

    // if in[0] >= in[1], then:
    //   bits[N], the nth bit toggled above by adding 2^N, remains 1 => out is 0
    // else:
    //   bits[N] turns into 0 => out is 1
    out <== 1 - bits[N];
}
{% endhighlight %}

{: .note}
It was actually ChatGPT who helped me understand that `acc` merely stores a symbolic expression that is derivable at compile-time (see [here](https://chatgpt.com/share/67d70727-0e14-8001-9831-a003bb53aa57)), because the circom docs, as far as I could tell, do not do a good job at clarifying the distinction between circom signals and circom variables.
So: _"thx chat!"_

### `DivRem()` template

It's surprisingly tricky to implement a basic "division with remainder" in circom because emulating integer division in a finite field is rife with dangers.
For [example](https://github.com/privacy-scaling-explorations/zk-kit.circom/issues/14#issuecomment-2598589492):

Normally, for any $a,b\in \N$, Euclid's division theorem says there exist **unique** $q,r\in\N$ s.t.:
\begin{align}
a = b q + r, 0\le r < b
\end{align}

Now, suppose we are implementing a circom template that checks $a,b,q,r$ for 
the properties above via:
```
a === b * q + r;
is_small_remainder <== LessThan([r, b]);
```

Are we good?
Is this enough to guarantee uniqueness of $q$ and $r$?

**Nope!** 
If the field were $\F_{13}$, then dividing $a=10$ by $b=3$ we would have two solutions:
\begin{align}
q = 3 \wedge r = 1\Rightarrow 3\times 3 + 1 = 10
\end{align}
But also:
\begin{align}
q = 7 \wedge r = 2\Rightarrow 7\times 3 + 2 = 23
\end{align}
And $23 \bmod 13 = 10$.

To fix this, we actually have to check that quotient $q$ is "in range": i.e., $\|q\| = \|a\| - \|b\| + 1$ ($\|x\| = $ minimum # of bits needed to represent $x$):

{% highlight circom linenos %}
// Assuming a is not zero, it should be enough to ensure that
//   2^{n-1} <= a < 2^n
// TODO: There should be more efficient methods based on Num2Bits.
//
// e.g., 1 bit  to represent 1: 2^{1-1} = 1 <= 1 < 2^1 = 2
// e.g., 2 bit  to represent 2: 2^{2-1} = 2 <= 2 < 2^2 = 4
// e.g., 2 bits to represent 3: 2^{2-1} = 2 <= 3 < 2^2 = 4
// e.g., 3 bits to represent 4: 2^{3-1} = 4 <= 4 < 2^3 = 8
// e.g., 3 bits to represent 5: 2^{3-1} = 4 <= 5 < 2^3 = 8
// e.g., 3 bits to represent 6: 2^{3-1} = 4 <= 6 < 2^3 = 8
// e.g., 3 bits to represent 7: 2^{3-1} = 4 <= 7 < 2^3 = 8
template MinNumBits(N)() {
    signal input {nonzero} a;
    signal output n;

    // TODO: Impl
}

// a < 2^N
// b < 2^M
// Note: We won't really be interesting in dividing zero, I suppose?
// (If we were, we can add simpler constraints that q == 0 and r == 0.)
template DivRem(N, M) {
    signal input {nonzero} a, b;
    signal output q, r;

    signal q <-- a \ b;
    signal r <-- a % b;

    // Check Euclidean division theorem, including r \in [0, b)
    a == q * b + r;

    signal valid_remainder <== LessThan(M)([r, b]);
    valid_remainder === 1;

    // Check that the quotient is bounded, otherwise we are in trouble
    signal n <== MinNumBits(N)(a);
    signal m <== MinNumBits(M)(b);

    // We cannot use anything smaller than N here since if b is 1, then q == a
    signal k === MinNumBits(N)(q);
    k == n - m + 1

}
{% endhighlight %}

{: .note}
You can see an implementation of a related template that computes just the remainder $r$, when a bound on $a$ is known, [here](https://github.com/zkFHE/circomlib-fhe/blob/96536373df183bc1849b96b0dc82f1a0f7a8abfd/circuits/mod.circom#L16).

## TODOs

How do we assert non-overflows on variables like?
What if they exceed the field size?

```
var MAX_QUOTIENT = (3 * MAX_ENCODED_LEN) \ 4;
```

## Conclusion

`circom` is an amazing tools for implementing ZK relations that (obviously) makes the developer's job 10,000x easier than writing R1CS constraints directly.

I am still trying to understand the many pitfalls developers can fall into when writing `circom` code, most importantly, under-constraining bugs.

Looking forward to looking at [NoirLang](https://x.com/NoirLang) to see if it makes it easier to distinguish between constraints and witness generation?

## Awesome list

 - [circomlib](https://github.com/iden3/circomlib/tree/master/circuits)
 - [circomlib-fhe](https://github.com/zkFHE/circomlib-fhe/tree/main/circuits)
 
## References

For cited works and other resources[^0xparc]$^,$[^tornadocash-circom]$^,$[^ecne]$^,$[^circom101]$^,$[^MBIplus22], see below 👇👇

[^0xparc]: [0xPARC ZK bug tracker](https://github.com/0xPARC/zk-bug-tracker)
[^circom101]: [Circom101](https://circom.erhant.me/) book
[^ecne]: [Ecne](https://github.com/franklynwang/EcneProject), _"verify that R1CS equations uniquely determine outputs given inputs (i.e. that the constraints are sound)"_
[^Hess24]: [Tag, you’re it: Signal tagging in Circom](https://blog.trailofbits.com/2024/01/02/tag-youre-it-signal-tagging-in-circom/), by Tjaden Hess, January 2nd, 2024
[^Pall23]: [A beginner's intro to coding zero-knowledge proofs](https://dev.to/spalladino/a-beginners-intro-to-coding-zero-knowledge-proofs-c56), by Santiago Palladino, May 4th 2023
[^tornadocash-circom]: [Breaking down TornadoCash](https://learn.0xparc.org/materials/circom/learning-group-1/breaking-down-tornado/), a live explanation of TorandoCash's `circom` implementation

<!-- Other interesting things:

 - https://github.com/pluto/circom-correctly-constrained?tab=readme-ov-file#example-3-further-examples
    + shows some non-intuitive automatic constraining happening
 - https://battlezips.gitbook.io/battlezips 
 - https://learn.0xparc.org/materials/circom/learning-group-1/circom-1
 - https://github.com/arnaucube/awesome-circom
 - a nice explanation by ChatGPT on how to test for `x === y` using just addition and multiplication by demanding to satisfy `(x-y) * inv === 1 - b`, where b is either 0 or 1: https://chatgpt.com/share/67d71175-8be8-8001-95cc-1ddec3c58b05
    + i guess if b is viewed as the output of a circuit that takes x and y as input (and inv as a hint input), then the verifier would constrain b to be 0 or 1 and this would force assigning inv correctly based on whether x == y
-->

{% include refs.md %}
