---
tags:
 - interpolation
 - polynomial commitments
 - polynomials
 - sumcheck
title: "Twinkle: A simple dense-to-sparse MLE compiler"
#date: 2020-11-05 20:45:59
#published: false 
permalink: twinkle
#sidebar:
#    nav: cryptomat
#article_header:
#  type: cover
#  image:
#    src: /pictures/.jpg
---

{: .info}
**tl;dr:** [Spartan](/spartan) is a versatile zkSNARK framework that requires a **sparse MLE PCS** to be instantiated.
This blog post explains a simple (and likely well-known) compiler to get such a PCS given a weaker dense PCS as input.

<!--more-->

{% include zkp.md %}
{% include mle.md %}

<!-- Here you can define LaTeX macros -->
<div style="display: none;">$
\def\FS{\mathcal{FS}}
\def\fsget{\stackrel{\FS}{\leftarrow}}
\def\FSo{ { \FS(\cdot) } }
%
\def\aux{\mathsf{aux}}
\def\prove{\mathsf{Prove}}
%
\def\b{\boldsymbol{b}}
\def\binS{\bin^s}
\def\binN{\bin^{\log{n}}}
\def\i{\boldsymbol{i}}
\def\j{\boldsymbol{j}}
\def\k{\boldsymbol{k}}
\def\r{\boldsymbol{r}}
\def\Z{\boldsymbol{Z}}
%
\def\bit{\mathsf{bit}}
\def\bits{\mathsf{bits}}
%
\def\row{\mathsf{row}}
\def\col{\mathsf{col}}
\def\val{\mathsf{val}}
%
\def\ck{\mathsf{ck}}
\def\ok{\mathsf{ok}}
\def\dense{\mathcal{\green{D}}}
\def\setup{\mathsf{Setup}}
\def\commit{\mathsf{Commit}}
\def\open{\mathsf{Open}}
\def\verify{\mathsf{Verify}}
$</div> <!-- $ -->

## Preliminaries
 
We assume familiarity with the [Spartan protocol](/spartan) and its mathematical preliminaries:
 
 - [MLEs](/spartan#multilinear-extensions-mles)
 - [sumchecks](/spartan#multivariate-sumcheck)
 - [Lagrange polynomials for interpolating MLEs](/spartan#mathsfeqmathbfxmathbfb-lagrange-polynomials)
 - [dense MLE PCSs](/spartan#dense-mle-pcs)
 - [sparse MLE PCSs](/spartan#sparse-mle-pcs)

### Notation

 - we use $[s) \bydef \\{0,1,\ldots,s-1\\}$
 - we typically denote the **boolean hypercube** of size $2^s$ as $\binS$
 - $\SC.\prove(F, T, s, d)\rightarrow (\pi,e; \r)$ is an algorithm that reduces $\sum_{\b \in \binS} F(\b) = T$ on an $s$-variate polynomial of max degree $d$ to:
    1. verifying a sumcheck proof $\pi$
    2. verifiying the $F(\r) = e$ opening for some random $\r\in \F^s$ (picked after $F$ is fixed)

## Twinkle explanation

The Spartan paper explained _Spark_, a compiler that takes any dense MLE PCS for size-$n$ MLEs and turns it into a **sparse** one for size $m^2$ MLEs with only $n \approx m$ non-zero entries.

This section explains **Twinkle**, a much simpler (but a bit more expensive) compiler than Spark[^Sett19e].

Recall that $m=2^s$ and that we have a size-$m^2$ MLE $\tilde{V}$ of a sparse R1CS square matrix, say, $V=(V\_{i,j})\_{i,j\in[m)}$ with $n\approx m$ non-zero entries:
\begin{align}
\tilde{V}(\X,\Y) = \sum\_{\i\in\binS,\j\in\binS} V\_{i,j}\cdot\eq\_i(\X)\eq\_j(\Y)
\end{align}

Our goal is to come up with an MLE PCS so we can efficiently and provably open $\tilde{V}$ at the random $(\r_x,\r_y)$ point picked by the verifier:
\begin{align}
\label{eq:r1cs-matrix-sumcheck}
\tilde{V}(\r_x,\r_y) = \sum_{\i\in\binS,\j\in\binS} A_{i,j}\cdot\eq_i(\r_x)\eq_j(\r_y)
\end{align}

**Our approach:** Take Spark and implement the most naive variant of it you can imagine!

{: .warning}
I'd bet at least three sangrias that this Twinkle approach was probably described in some paper or even in Spartan itself.
A similar idea, but around a permutation MLE $\sigma$, is described in the HyperPLONK paper[^CBBZ22e] (see Section 3.6 on _"Another permutation PIOP"_).
Hopefully, someone more knowledgeable than me will confirm and I will add more context after!

For each R1CS matrix $V$, the universal setup will commit to three **dense** MLEs representing the $n$ non-zero entries $V_{i,j}$ in the matrix and their locations $i,j$.

Denote the set of $n$ non-zero entries in a matrix $V$ by:
\begin{align}
%N\_V \bydef 
\left(i_k,j_k,V_{i_k,j_k}\right)\_{k\in[n)}
\end{align}

Then, we can define three MLEs $\row,\col,\val : \F^{\log{n}} \rightarrow \F$ that represent this set as:
\begin{align}
\label{eq:rows-cols-vals}
\forall k\in[n),
\begin{cases}
    \term{\row(\k)} &= i_k \wedge {}\\\\\
    \term{\col(\k)} &= j_k \wedge {}\\\\\
    \term{\val(\k)} &= A_{i_k,j_k}
\end{cases}
%\row(\X) \bydef \sum_{\b\in\binS} 
\end{align}
(These can be interpolated [as usual](#multilinear-extensions-mles).)

Now assume a function that converts a row or column index $i\in[m)$ (or $j\in[m)$) to its $s$-bit binary representation:

$$\term{\bits} : [m) \rightarrow \binS$$

As a result, we can rewrite the R1CS matrix sumcheck from Eq. \ref{eq:r1cs-matrix-sumcheck} as:
\begin{align}
\label{eq:r1cs-sparse-sumcheck}
\tilde{V}(\r_x,\r_y) 
&= \sum_{\i,\j\in\binS} V_{i,j}\cdot\eq_i(\r_x)\cdot\eq_j(\r_y)\\\\\
&= \sum_{\i,\j\in\binS} V_{i,j}\cdot\eq_{\r_x}(\i)\cdot\eq_{\r_y}(\j)\\\\\
&= \sum_{V_{i,j}\ne 0} V_{i,j}\cdot\eq_{\r_x}(\i)\cdot\eq_{\r_y}(\j)\\\\\
\label{eq:r1cs-dense-sumcheck}
&= \sum_{k\in[n)} \val(\k)\cdot\eq_{\r_x}(\bits(\row(\k)))\cdot\eq_{\r_y}(\bits(\col(\k)))\\\\\
%&\bydef \sum_{k\in[n)} \val(\k)\cdot\eqr{V}(\k,\r_x)\eqc{V}(\k,\r_y)\\\\\
\end{align}

{: .error}
Unfortunately, the term inside the sum above from Eq. \ref{eq:r1cs-dense-sumcheck} is **not** a polynomial.
This is because $\bits$'s domain is $[m)$ and we cannot evaluate it on arbitrary field elements in $\F$.
<!-- This is because the evaluation is a random field element in $\F$ which will no longer necessarily be in the $[m)$ domain of $\bits$.-->

<!--The **difficulty** will be in convincing the verifier who has a commitment to $\row$, that the random $\eq_{\r_x}(\bits(\row(\r_k)))$ evaluation at $\r_k\randget \F^{\log{n}}$ at the end of the sumcheck is correct. (Same for the column.)-->

{: .note}
My understanding so far is that Spark is an efficient protocol for "linearizing" the $\eq_{\r_x}(\bits(\row(\r_k)))$ expression into an MLE that agrees with it over hypercube (and its $\col$ counterpart).

So far, we are re-stating Spark.

**What we do differently:** for the row indices, we will have **one MLE per each bit of a row index**.
We will have the same for the column indices.
In total, there will now be $2s+1$ MLEs produced by the universal setup:
\begin{align}
\label{eq:bit-rows-cols-vals}
\forall k\in[n), 
\begin{cases}
    \term{\row_{t}(\k)} &= \term{\bit_t(i_k)}, \forall t \in [s) \wedge {}\\\\\
    \term{\col_{t}(\k)} &= \bit_t(j_k)       , \forall t \in [s) \wedge {}\\\\\
    \val(\k) &= A_{i_k,j_k} 
\end{cases}
\end{align}
where $\term{\bit_t(b)}$ denotes the $t$th bit in $b$'s binary expansion:
\begin{align}
\row(\k) =\sum_{t\in[s)} 2^t \cdot \row_{t}(\k)
\end{align}
(i.e., the $t$th element in $\bits(b)$). 

Now, we can rewrite the sumcheck from Eq. \ref{eq:r1cs-dense-sumcheck} as: 
\begin{align}
\tilde{V}(\r\_x,\r\_y) &= \sum\_{k\in[n)} \val(\k)\cdot\eq_{\r_x}(\bits(\row(\k)))\cdot\eq_{\r_y}(\bits(\col(\k)))\\\\\
\label{eq:E}
&= \sum\_{k\in[n)}
  \val(\k)\cdot
  \underbrace{
    \eq_{\r_x}(\row_{0}(\k),\ldots,\row_{s-1}(\k))
  }\_{\term{E_x(\k)}}
     \cdot
  \underbrace{\eq_{\r_y}(\col_{0}(\k),\ldots,\col_{s-1}(\k))}\_{\term{E_y(\k)}}\\\\\
\label{eq:dense-sum}
&\bydef \sum_{k\in[n)} \val(\k) \cdot E_x(\k) \cdot E_y(\k)
\end{align}

As a result, at the end of the sumcheck, the verifier has the random point $\r_k\randget\F^{\log{n}}$ and evaluation claims $\val(\r_k),E_x(\r_k)$ and $E_y(\r_k)$.

Then, the verifier can be given a batched evaluation proof for $\left((\row_{t}(\r\_k),\col_t(\r\_k))\_{t\in[s)}, \val(\r_k)\right)$.
The $\row_t(\r_k)$ and $\col_t(\r_k)$ evaluations can be used to reconstruct the $E_x(\r_k)$ and $E_y(\r_k)$ evaluations, as per Eq. \ref{eq:E}.

Therefore, the verifier will have everything it needs to validate the $\tilde{V}(\r_x,\r_y)$ evaluation.

There are a few challenges:

 1. The sumcheck will be over a degree-$\log{m}$ multivariate polynomial of $\log{n}$ variables (see [below](#inefficiencies))
     + The sumcheck proof will be $\log{n}\log{m}$-sized $\Rightarrow$ we need to compress it!
 1. While we can batch the evaluation proof for $\left((\row_{t}(\r\_k),\col_t(\r\_k))\_{t\in[s)}, \val(\r_k)\right)$, we still need to include the actual $2s + 1$ evaluations to allow the verifier to check the sumcheck? 

### Inefficiencies

Consider the $E_x(\Z)$ polynomial defined above (and, similarly, $E_y(\Z)$):
\begin{align}
E_x(\Z)\bydef
E_x(Z_0,\ldots,Z_{\log{n}-1}) \bydef 
\eq_{\r_x}(\row_{0}(\Z),\ldots,\row_{s-1}(\Z)) 
\end{align}
Note that it will have $\log{n}$ variables, with degree $\log{m}\bydef s$ in each variable.

<details>
<summary>
👇 Why? 👇
</summary>
<div style="border:1px dashed black; padding: 2px;">
Recall that the $\row_{i}(\Z)$ MLEs have $\log{n}$ variables of degree-1 each (like the original $\row$ MLE).
Recall from Eq. \ref{eq:lagrange} that, when expanded, $\eq_{\r_x}(\X)=\eq_{\r_x}(X_0,\dots,X_{s-1})$ multiplies together its $s$ variables.
Since the $i$th variable $X_i$ will be set to the $\row_{i}(\Z)$ MLE, $E_x(\Z)$ will contain a product of $s$ MLEs.

Therefore, the $E_x(\Z)$ polynomial will have $\log{n}$ variables with max degree $s$ in each variable.
</div>
</details>

This will result in an $O(s n)=O(n\log{m})$-time sumcheck proving time.
And, if done naively, in an $O(s\log{n})=O(\log{n}\log{m})$ communication and verifier time?

{: .warning}
It may also be tricky to implement this sumcheck efficiently because of the degree-$\log{m}$ $E_x(\Z)$ polynomials.

The other problem will be that computing the batched evaluation proof will involve combining together $2s+1$ MLEs of size $n$ each $\rightarrow O(n \log{m})$ work.

So, asymptotically, this will not perform as well as Spartan with Spark.

The **key question** is: how well will this perform for sufficiently-large-but-not-too-large circuits (e.g., $n \le 2^{23}$ R1CS non-zero entries)

## Twinkle algorithms

### $\mathsf{Twinkle}_{\mathcal{D}}.\mathsf{Setup}(n, m) \Rightarrow (\mathsf{ck},\mathsf{ok})$

 - $(\ck_\dense, \ok_\dense) \gets \dense.\setup(n)$
 - $s\gets \log{m}$
 - $\term{\ck}\gets (\ck_\dense, s, n)$
 - $\term{\ok}\gets (\ok_\dense, s, n)$

### $\mathsf{Twinkle}_{\mathcal{D}}.\mathsf{Commit}(\mathsf{ck}, \tilde{V}) \Rightarrow (c, \aux)$
 
Commit to the row, column and value MLEs, as defined in Eq. \ref{eq:bit-rows-cols-vals}.
 - $(\ck_\dense, s, \cdot)\parse \ck$
 - $c_{\row,t} \gets \dense.\commit(\ck_\dense,\row_t),\forall t\in[s)$
 - $c_{\col,t} \gets \dense.\commit(\ck_\dense,\col_t),\forall t\in [s)$
 - $c_\val \gets \dense.\commit(\ck_\dense,\val)$
 - $\term{c}\gets ((c\_{\row,t},c\_{\col,t})\_{t\in[s)},c_\val)$
 - $\term{\aux}\gets \left((\row_t(\Z),\col_t(\Z))_{t\in[s)}, \val(\Z)\right)$

### $\mathsf{Twinkle}\_{\mathcal{D}}.\mathsf{Open}^{\mathcal{FS}(\cdot)}(\mathsf{ck}, \mathsf{aux}, c, \tilde{V}, (\r_x, \r_y)) \Rightarrow (v, \pi)$

As per Eq. \ref{eq:E}, let:
 - $E_x(\Z)\bydef \eq_{\r_x}(\row_{0}(\Z),\ldots,\row_{s-1}(\Z))$
 - $E_y(\Z)\bydef \eq_{\r_y}(\col_{0}(\Z),\ldots,\col_{s-1}(\Z))$

Do the sumcheck:
 - add $c$ to the $\FS$ transcript
 - $(\cdot, s, n)\parse \ck$
 - $\term{v}\gets\tilde{V}(\r_x,\r_y)$
 - $(e_\Sigma, \pi_\Sigma; \r_k) \gets \SC.\prove^\FSo(\val \cdot E_x \cdot E_y, v, \log{n}, s)$

Open the dense polynomials at the sumcheck challenge point:
 - $(\ck_\dense, \cdot, \cdot)\parse \ck$
 - $((\rho_t, \gamma_t)_{t\in [s)}) \fsget \F^{2s}$
 - $P(\Z) \gets \val(\Z) + \sum_{t\in[s)} \rho_t \cdot \row_t(\Z) + \gamma_t \cdot \col_t(\Z)$
 - $c_P \gets c_\val + \sum_{t\in[s)} \rho_t \cdot c_{\row,t} + \gamma_t \cdot c_{\col,t}$
    + Note: Assuming homomorphic dense MLE PCS commitments
 - $(\cdot, \pi_P) \gets \dense.\open^\FSo(\ck_\dense, c_P, P, \r_k)$

Let:
 - $v_\val \gets \val(\r_k)$
 - $v_{\row,t}\gets \row_t(\r_k),\forall t\in[s)$
 - $v_{\col,t}\gets \col_t(\r_k),\forall t\in[s)$
    + (Recall that the sumcheck challenge evaluation is for $e_\Sigma\equals\val(\r_k)\cdot E_x(\r_k) \cdot E_y(\r_k)$

The proof will be:
 - $\term{\pi} \gets \left(\left((v\_{\row,t},v\_{\col,t})\_{t\in[s)},v_\val\right), \pi_P,e_\Sigma,\pi_\Sigma\right)$

#### Proof size

  - sumcheck evaluation claim $e_\sum$
    - 32 bytes
  - sumcheck proof $\pi_\sum$ for $e_\sum$
    + e.g., without compression, for $n=2^{23},m = 2^{20}$, $\left((\log{m}+1)\log{n} + 1\right)\times \F = (21\times 23 + 1)\times 32 = 484 \times 32 =$ 15,488 bytes $=$ 15.125 KiB
  - dense MLE PCS opening proof $\pi_P$
  - row, column and value polynomial evaluations
    + e.g., for $s=20$, $(2\cdot 20 + 1)\times \F = 1312$ bytes

### $\mathsf{Twinkle}\_{\mathcal{D}}.\mathsf{Verify}^{\mathcal{FS}(\cdot)}(\mathsf{ok}, c, v, (\r_x, \r_y); \pi) \Rightarrow \\{0,1\\}$

Verify sumcheck proof, reducing the claim that $v$ is the sum from Eq. \ref{eq:dense-sum} (i.e., $v = \tilde{V}(\r_x,\r_y)$) to a claim that $e_\Sigma\equals\val(\r_k) \cdot E_x(\r_k)\cdot E_y(\r_k)$:
 - $(\cdot, s, \cdot)\parse \ok$
 - add $c$ to the $\FS$ transcript
 - $\left(\cdot, \cdot,e_\Sigma,\pi_\Sigma\right)\parse \pi$
 - $(b; \r_k) \gets \SC.\verify^\FSo(v, e_\Sigma, s; \pi_\Sigma)$
 - **assert** $b\equals 1$

Reduce checking the $e_\Sigma$ evaluation claim to verifying dense MLE PCS openings:
 - $\left(\left((v\_{\row,t},v\_{\col,t})\_{t\in[s)},v_\val\right), \cdot,\cdot,\cdot\right)\parse \pi$
 - **assert** $e_\Sigma\equals v_\val \cdot \eq_{\r_x}(v_{\row,0},\ldots,v_{\row,s-1}) \cdot \eq_{\r_y}(v_{\col,0},\ldots,v_{\col,s-1})$
     + (i.e., check that $e_\Sigma\equals\val(\r_k)\cdot E_x(\r_k) \cdot E_y(\r_k)$

Verify said dense MLE openings:
 - $((c\_{\row,t},c\_{\col,t})\_{t\in[s)},c_\val)\parse c$
 - $((\rho_t, \gamma_t)_{t\in [s)}) \fsget \F^{2s}$
 - $c_P \gets c_\val + \sum_{t\in[s)} \rho_t \cdot c_{\row,t} + \gamma_t \cdot c_{\col,t}$
    + Note: Assuming homomorphic dense MLE PCS commitments
 - $v_P \gets v_\val + \sum_{t\in[s)} \rho_t \cdot v_{\row,t} + \gamma_t \cdot v_{\col,t}$
 - $(\ok_\dense,\cdot,\cdot)\parse\ok$
 - $\left(\cdot, \pi_P,\cdot,\cdot\right)\parse \pi$
 - **assert** $\dense.\verify^\FSo(\ok_\dense, c_P, v_P, \r_k;\pi_P)$

Succeed:
 - **return** 1

#### Verifier time

 1. Verify a sumcheck over a degree-$\log{m}$ polynomial with $\log{n}$ variables.
 1. Verify $e_\sum$ given row, column and val. poly. evaluations (involves evaluating $\eq_{\r_x},\eq_{\r_y}$ polynomials over $\log{m}$ variables.)
 1. Fiat-Shamir hashing for the $\rho_t,\gamma_t$ linear combination 
 1. Derive dense MLE PCS commitment for random linear combination poylnomial $P(\Z)$
    + e.g., $(2\log{m})$-sized $\Gr_1$ MSM assuming PST commitments
 1. Derive random linear combination for $P(\r_k)$
    + i.e., $2\log{m} \times \F$ multiplications
 1. Verify dense MLE PCS opening on $P(\Z)$


## Conclusion

### Acknowledgements

Thanks to Weijie Wang for explaining Spark[^Sett19e].
That's how we arrived at Twinkle; by simply asking: _"What's the simplest thing we could do instead?"_
Thanks to Albert Garretta for listening to an explanation of Twinkle and helping us reason through it.

## References

For cited works, see below 👇👇

{% include refs.md %}
